Abstract:
Next-generation sequencing techniques such as Whole genome sequencing (WGS) generate large amounts of genomic data at a reasonable cost and in a limited period. These technological developments have provided valuable insights into genetic variants and specific mutations in pathogens impacting antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Traditionally, this has been done by aligning short sequence reads to reference genomes or by reference-free k-mer analysis. Reference-based techniques may introduce biases or overlook novel variants, whereas reference-free methods can capture a wider range of genetic diversity. The dataset used for the project involved 1,000 Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) samples from various geographically diverse regions, representing a range of MTBC lineages, received from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.  In this project, a genome-wide association studies (GWAS) approach was used to compare the performance of reference-based and reference-free pipelines in detecting mutations related to resistance against Mycobacterium tuberculosis first-line drugs like rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide. Using profiling tools like pyseer, the study compares the results from two pipelines to detect relationships between phenotypic traits and genetic variants, enabling more accurate identification of genetic factors associated with antimicrobial resistance (AMR), and verifying the genetic factors from the output of both pipelines against data available in the Tuberculosis Database(TBDB),  A  repository for the TBProfiler library data to verify the genes. This data generated from pyseer helps in undergoing validation, mutations associated with AMR detected by this study could facilitate AMR profiling and be used to monitor drug-resistant tuberculosis.

